We're now going to
go ahead and wrap up
our coverage of the Java
Completable Futures Framework
by talking about some
of the enhancements that
have been added recently--
recently being relative-- been
added since Java 8 came out.
So that could be a number
of years at this point.
So Java 9 provided a bunch
of enhancements to the Java 8
Completable Future framework,
and later versions of Java
have also added a
few more things.
But I wanted to focus on
these four properties most.
One of the things is you can
now have a defaultExecutor
method that will return
the defaultExecutor used
if you don't specify one.
Before you would always default
to the common ForkJoinPool,
but now you can override
that in subclasses
to give different behaviors.
There's a method
called completeAsync,
which can basically be the
async version of complete,
and it will complete
the Completable Future
asynchronously by using whatever
value is given by a supplier.
So you can leave that
as a runtime decision.
We'll actually look and see how
that code works in a second.
There's a very interesting
method called orTimeout
which will ensure that a
Completable Future finishes
within a certain time, and
if it doesn't, then a timeout
exception will be thrown.
And then the final method
we're going to talk about
is called
completeOnTimeout, which
says if the Completable Future
doesn't finish within a given
time, return this value
and use it as the value,
rather than waiting past
the time-out period.
Let's show how we can apply
orTimeout and completeOnTimeout
to a simple program.
It's actually kind of fun.
And you can take a look at this.
I have a variant of the program
implemented in my ex27 folder
in my GitHub account.
This example asynchronously
performs web services,
or emulated web services,
within a bounded amount of time.
And what it does is it first
tries to asynchronously find
the best price for a flight
from London to New York City.
And that, of course, will
use the defaultExecutor
which is the common
ForkJoinPool,
because [INAUDIBLE] supply async
with no executor parameter.
Then we also simultaneously
go on asynchronous
to try to find the
latest exchange rate.
So we want to find out
what's the exchange rate
for, say, pounds to dollars?
And that will also
run asynchronously.
If it turns out that that
exchange rate call takes
longer than 2
seconds, we're just
going to give the default rate.
So that's the
completeOnTimeout method.
When both of those
completable futures complete--
when we know the best price and
we know what the exchange rate
is, which could be the
default if it timed out--
we're then going to go ahead and
convert the dollars to pounds.
That's what convert does.
We then put the
orTimeout method in here,
and that basically says
throw a timeout exception
if everything you just did
takes longer than 3 seconds--
in particular if it took
longer than 3 seconds
to find the best price,
because the time to find
the exchange rate will
be bounded by 2 seconds.
When this completes,
no matter what
happens, whether we had
an exception or not,
we're going to go out
and see whether or not
we had an exception.
If we did not have
an exception, we'll
print the amount of
the price in pounds.
And if an exception
occurred, We'll
print out what the exception
was-- which will undoubtedly
be Timeout exception.
And the program itself that
you can run artificially
puts in timeouts
that are random.
So sometimes this will work.
Sometimes the exchange
rate will time out.
Sometimes the whole
thing will time out.
Sometimes everything
will work fine.
And so it's fun to run it, I
think if you run the program,
by default, it runs for
100 iterations or something
with random timeouts,
and you can really
see how the timeout
mechanisms work.
Of course, in order
for this to work,
you need to have Java 9 or
beyond, because otherwise
there's no support for orTimeout
or completeOnTimeout in Java 8.
The last thing I want
to talk about here
is showing how to apply
the completeAsync method
to our big fraction example.
So there's a method
called testFractionMult
iplicationCompleteAsync in
the ex8 folder in my GitHub
account.
And you can see
what this does is
it makes a string builder to
hold the intermediate results.
We then go ahead and define
a pair of big fractions.
We then create a completable
future that's empty.
So it has nothing to do yet.
We haven't given it
any computations.
We call a method
known as thenRun.
We haven't really talked
much about thenRun,
because it doesn't
get used a whole lot,
but this is a good
place to use it.
thenRun registers an
action that appends
a string when it's called.
And in this particular
case, thenRun
will be called in
the calling thread.
And when thenRun is
called, it will go ahead
and append the string
completeAsync result
= to the string buffer.
We then go ahead and
call completeAsync
on the completable future.
Now, remember, we gave
it no behavior before,
so we have to
complete it somehow.
If we just call it
complete, then it
would go ahead and synchronously
apply this expression
and get the results of
multiplying two big fractions.
By calling completeAsync,
that arranges
to run this supplier
lambda in a thread
in the common ForkJoinPool.
So this computation will
take place in the background.
And that will then set
all the wheels in motion.
So at that point, when
completeAsync is called,
that will run the
thenRun action to append
to completeAsync result
=, and that that'll
run in the main thread--
the calling thread.
The completeAsync operation will
take place in the background,
and then we will go ahead and
have the background thread
multiply the two big fraction
objects together and return
a result. The computations
between completeAsync
and when we get
the result and join
with it could run concurrently--
of course, as always.
Then the last thing we do
is we go ahead and call
the join method on
f, which will return
when the computation of
completeAsync has finished.
That will convert
to a mixed string
and append it to
the string buffer,
and then the last thing we do
is we display the string buffer
after first converting
it to a string.
So if you run this
example, you'll
see that it'll basically
say Starting test,
completeAsync result
=, and then it'll
go ahead and print the mixed
string of multiplying those two
big fractions together.
And so that's just
an illustration
of how the completeAsync
method could be used.
I don't find it to
be all that useful,
but it's just kind of an
interesting example of a newer
method that was added in the
later versions of the Java
Completable Futures framework.